CREATE TABLE cats
    (
        cat_id INT NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
        name varchar(100),
        breed varchar(40),
        age INT,
        primary key (cat_id)
    );

INSERT INTO cats(name, breed, age)
VALUES  ('Ringo', 'tabby', 4),
        ('Cindy', 'Maine Coon', 10),
        ('Dumbledore', 'Maine Coon', 11),
        ('Egg', 'Persian', 4),
        ('Misty', 'Tabby', 13),
        ('George Michael', 'Ragdoll', 9),
        ('Jackson', 'Sphynx', 7);

select and display all columns:
SELECT * FROM CATS;

SELECT name, breed from cats;

select name as "Cat's Name", breed as "the breed" from cats;
//shows custom column names, useful to display data sometimes.


UPDATE

syntax -> the second line where selects the column and the first line sets the new value to that column.
UPDATE <table> SET <column_to_change> = <new_value> (value of new column)
    WHERE <column> = <value> (TO SELECT THE RIGHT COLUMN)



UPDATE cats SET breed = "Shorthair" WHERE breed = 'tabby';

//updates the table cat, sets breed equal to shorthair in columbs where it's
defined as tabby. as per the command.

change misty's age to 14;
update cats set age = 14 where name = 'Misty';

IMPORTANT:

TRY SELECTING BEFORE UPDATING, just to make sure you don't update
wrong data.


exercises for udpate:

1. change jackson's name to jack.

-> UPDATE 

2. change ringo's breed to "British Shorthair"

3. update both main coons' ages to be 12.

DELETE

DELETE from cats where name name = 'Egg'; //deletes the row with 'egg'

DELETE FROM cats; will delete every row from the table;

1. delete all cats that are  4 years old.
--> delete from cats where age = 4; //deletes ringo because he is 4.
2. delete cats whose age is same as cat_id
--> delete from cats where cats_id=age // deletes Jack.
3. delete all cats
--> delete from cats; //deletes the entire table. ;-) 